Adds C4B-Ansible initial documentation (#853)
chocolatey/docs: input/en-us/c4b-environments/ansible/index.md

---
Order: 40
xref: c4b-ansible
Title: C4B Ansible Environment
Description: High level information about the Chocolatey for Business Ansible Environment
---

## Summary

This is an overview of the Chocolatey for Business Ansible Environment.

This is a playbook and selection of modules, allowing for the speedy creation of an opinionated, pre-configured environment containing Chocolatey Central Management (CCM), a package repository (Nexus OSS), and an automation engine (Jenkins).

> :choco-info: **NOTE**
>
> A Chocolatey for Business Ansible Environment is a fully functional Chocolatey for Business environment; as such, it will require a business or trial license.

## Prerequisites

To deploy the Chocolatey for Business Ansible Environment you will need:

> * A Chocolatey for Business License, or Trial License
> * One or more existing VMs accessible to your Ansible host
> * The ability to create a CNAME DNS record for your chosen FQDN
> * A valid certificate for your chosen FQDN, in PFX format, with exportable private key

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* A Chocolatey for Business license, or Trial license.
* One or more existing virtual machines accessible to your Ansible host.
* The ability to create a CNAME DNS record for your chosen FQDN.
* A valid certificate for your chosen FQDN, in PFX format, with exportable private key.
```

> For portions of this guide using Ansible, we will assume that you either have an Ansible Execution Environment preconfigured, or are using the dev container to execute the playbooks. You should have the latest supported version of the `Chocolatey.Chocolatey` Ansible collection installed, along with any additional prerequisites listed in the `requirements.txt`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For portions of this guide using Ansible, we will assume that you either have an Ansible Execution Environment preconfigured, or are using the devcontainer to execute the playbooks. You should have the latest supported version of the `Chocolatey.Chocolatey` Ansible collection installed, along with any additional prerequisites listed in the `requirements.txt`.
```

Other instances in this doc have devcontainer as a single word. Also, this may be a new concept to readers, maybe link to docs about what a devcontainer is?

> For portions of this guide using Ansible, we will assume that you either have an Ansible Execution Environment preconfigured, or are using the dev container to execute the playbooks. You should have the latest supported version of the `Chocolatey.Chocolatey` Ansible collection installed, along with any additional prerequisites listed in the `requirements.txt`.

Reviewer: How do you install the collection and any other prerequisites in `requirements.txt`?

## Deploying the Chocolatey for Business Ansible Environment

> The Chocolatey for Business Ansible Environment is designed to deploy Chocolatey Central Management and all of our suggested complimentary softwares to one or more VMs within your environment, and provide methods for deploying the Chocolatey For Business to your other endpoints.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Chocolatey For Business Ansible Environment is designed to deploy Chocolatey Central Management and all of our suggested complimentary software to one or more virtual machines within your environment, and provide methods for deploying the Chocolatey For Business to your other endpoints.
```

> The Chocolatey for Business Ansible Environment is designed to deploy Chocolatey Central Management and all of our suggested complimentary softwares to one or more VMs within your environment, and provide methods for deploying the Chocolatey For Business to your other endpoints.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Chocolatey for Business Ansible Environment is designed to deploy Chocolatey Central Management and all the suggested software to one or more virtual machines within your environment, and provide methods for deploying Chocolatey for Business to your other endpoints.
```

You can deploy this using Ansible Automation Platform, an existing installation of the Ansible client, or the devcontainer image provided within the repository (as well as a variety of other methods.)

This guide will be written as if you were using Ansible from a local installation or the devcontainer, but can be easily adapted to run from Automation Platform / AWX.

> :choco-info: **NOTE**
>
> If you want to run this deployment on an environment that doesn't have access to the internet, refer to the [offline deployment](xref:c4b-ansible-offline-deployment) page and start on a Windows machine.

### Setup

Clone or otherwise download the `c4b-ansible` repository from [GitHub](https://github.com/chocolatey/c4b-ansible).

```sh
git clone https://github.com/chocolatey/c4b-ansible.git
```

> ### Configuring your Hosts

Reviewer 2: I don't think the instructions themselves should be included here, but given there are example inventories included that don't include any of the WinRM things that would enable Ansible to connect to the hosts, should we link to a resource about managing Windows hosts?

Main concern is someone comes into this thinking the examples are complete and then complain.

> ### Configuring your Hosts

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Configuring Your Hosts
```

> You can deploy the Chocolatey for Business Ansible Environment to a single VM, or several. There are four services being installed:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can deploy the Chocolatey for Business Ansible Environment to one or more virtual machines. There are four services being installed:
```

Reviewer: Note that you called these 'components' earlier. You need to be consistent. Use 'service' or 'component' but not both.

* Chocolatey Central Management

> * Nexus Repository OSS

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Sonatype Nexus Repository
```

* Jenkins
* Optional: SQL Server Express

> You can specify a separate host for any of these, or specify an existing database, or a single host which will have everything deployed to it.

Reviewer: I think you should delete that line. You said above that they can be installed on multiple virtual machines. The rest of that line doesn't make sense to me.

> #### Installing to a Single Host

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Installing On a Single Host
```

> To install to a single host, create a host with the title `ccm_server`. This will be the default host to install anything to. There is an example of a hosts file containing a single host in the root of the repository - `hosts.yml`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To install on a single host, create a host with the title `ccm_server`. This will be the default host. There is an example of a hosts file containing a single host in the root of the repository - `hosts.yml`.
```

Example:

```yaml
  hosts:
    ccm_server:
      ansible_host: chocoserver
      ansible_user: ansibleuser
      ansible_password: !vault |
          $ANSIBLE_VAULT;1.1;AES256
          [...]
```

> #### Installing to Multiple Hosts

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Installing On Multiple Hosts
```

> To install to multiple hosts, define hosts with the following names:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To install on multiple hosts, define hosts with the following names:
```

* `ccm_server`: Chocolatey Central Management service and website

> * `nexus_server`: Nexus Repository OSS

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `nexus_server`: Sonatype Nexus Repository
```

* `jenkins_server`: Jenkins
* `database_server`: SQL Server Express

Example:

```yaml

>   all:
>     vars:
>       ansible_user: ansibleuser
>       ansible_password: !vault |
>           $ANSIBLE_VAULT;1.1;AES256
>           [...]
>   hosts:
>     ccm_server:
>       ansible_host: chocoserver
>     nexus_server:
>       ansible_host: nexus
>     jenkins_server:
>       ansible_host: chocorunner
>     database_server:
>       ansible_host: db1

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
all:
  vars:
    ansible_user: ansibleuser
    ansible_password: !vault |
          $ANSIBLE_VAULT;1.1;AES256
          [...]
  hosts:
    ccm_server:
      ansible_host: chocoserver
    nexus_server:
      ansible_host: nexus
    jenkins_server:
      ansible_host: chocorunner
    database_server:
      ansible_host: db1
```

Fixing indentation.

```

> If any are not defined, the service will be installed to the `ccm_server` host.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If any are not defined, the service will be installed on the `ccm_server` host.
```

If a connection string is passed, we assume the database is set up and do not install SQL Server.

> #### Using an existing Database

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Using An Existing Database
```

> You can provide an existing connection string to the environment to use for storing Chocolatey Central Management data. This can have significant benefits for performance, as well as simplifying backups and load-balancing of instances.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can provide a connection string to the environment to use for storing Chocolatey Central Management data. This can have significant benefits for performance, as well as simplifying backups and load-balancing of instances.
```

> To use an existing database, follow the instructions for preparing it in [creating a database](xref:ccm-database) and provide the connection string when prompted by the playbook.

Reviewer: That doesn't make sense to read. If you have an existing database, follow the instructions for creating a database?

### Setting Secrets

Secrets, including credentials, for the various services will be generated during the deployment. They are stored temporarily in the `/credentials` directory within the repository, and you should store and remove them from this when the deployment is complete.

> If you would prefer to create and maintain them from scratch, you can modify the values of the following secrets within the `/group_vars/all.yml` file:

Reviewer 2: Link to the file

Example:

```yaml
ccm_password: !vault |
  $ANSIBLE_VAULT;1.1;AES256

>   [...]

Reviewer 2: There's been a lot of example Vault placeholders throughout, It may pay to add a note (with a link to the docs) about Ansible Vault. To a novice "$ANSIBLE_VAULT;1.1;AES256" doesn't really mean anything.

ccm_client_salt: !vault |
  $ANSIBLE_VAULT;1.1;AES256
  [...]
ccm_service_salt: !vault |
  $ANSIBLE_VAULT;1.1;AES256
  [...]
ccm_encryption_password: !vault |
  $ANSIBLE_VAULT;1.1;AES256
  [...]
```

### Internalize Packages

You can select packages to directly internalize at the end of the deployment from the [Chocolatey Community Repository](https://community.chocolatey.org/packages/).

To do so, uncomment the example array `internalize_packages` in the `/group_vars/all.yml`, and add packages that you wish to be internalized.

Example:

```yaml
# Packages to Internalize
internalize_packages:
- 1password
- 7zip
- adobereader
- azcopy
- azure-cli
- firefox
- git
- notepadplusplus
- powershell
- slack
- vscode
```

> This will result in the specified packages (assuming there is a package with a matching ID on the Chocolatey Community Repository) being internalized and available on your environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This will result in packages matching the ID's being internalized from the Chocolatey Community Repository.
```

### Deploying the Environment

You can now run the playbook using `ansible-playbook`. If you have modified the hosts file in the base of the repository, you can run it as follows:

```sh
ansible-playbook ./c4b-environment.yml -i ./hosts.yml
```

The playbook will prompt you for the location of your license, certificate, and password. You can optionally provide a database connection string (as described above). After you have answered these prompts, the playbook will deploy all of the services.

![Initial Playbook Prompts](/assets/images/c4b-ansible/playbook-prompts.jpg)

> :choco-info: **NOTE**
>

> > You can add the values to an inventory file or the playbook directly, instead of being prompted at runtime.

Reviewer 2: What are the variables? If putting them in the inventory... where? (all, specific host, etc?)

> ### Configuring CCM

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Configuring Chocolatey Central Management
```

> :choco-warning: **WARNING**
>

> > You cannot create users in CCM until you have configured an SMTP server. To do this, please see [how to configure SMTP in CCM](xref:ccm-website#step-4.2-smtp-configuration).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> You cannot create users in Chocolatey Central Management until you have configured an SMTP server. To do this, please see [how to configure SMTP](xref:ccm-website#step-4.2-smtp-configuration).
```

> > You can log in to CCM using the credentials provided in the credentials document (see [Accessing Services](#accessing-services), below).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> You can log in to Chocolatey Central Management using the credentials provided in the credentials document (see [Accessing Services](#accessing-services), below).
```

## Accessing Services

> At this point, your environment should be deployed. You should be able to access the following services:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At this point, the Chocolatey for Business Ansible Environment should be deployed with the following acessible services:
```

| Service                           | Address                  | Initial Username |
| --------------------------------- | :----------------------- | ---------------- |

> | **Chocolatey Central Management** | https://\<FQDN\>/        | ccmadmin         |

Reviewer 3: I don't like this placeholder....seems like it could cause confusion.

Reviewer 2: Agreed, maybe code blocking the `<FQDN>` would be enough?

> | **Sonatype Nexus**                | https://\<FQDN\>/nexus   | admin            |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| **Sonatype Nexus Repository**     | https://\<FQDN\>/nexus   | admin            |
```

| **Jenkins**                       | https://\<FQDN\>/jenkins | admin            |

> Passwords to log in to the services have been stored in the credentials directory within the root of the c4b-ansible repository.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Passwords to login to the services have been stored in the credentials directory within the root of the `c4b-ansible repository`.
```

There should be a `CCM.html` file that contains a start-up guide, including initial steps and credentials for the various services. You should secure this appropriately.

## FAQ

### SSL Certificate

You will need an SSL certificate for the domain you intend to use. This certificate:

> * Needs to be in the PFX format
> * Needs to include an exportable Private Key
> * Must have a password

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Needs to be in the PFX format.
* Needs to include an exportable Private Key.
* Must have a password.
```

You can either provide a self-signed SSL certificate, or a purchased or acquired certificate from a Certificate Authority (CA).

#### Self-Signed SSL Certificates

You can quickly generate a self-signed certificate on any recent Windows computer, using PowerShell.

**PowerShell:**

1. Open an elevated PowerShell console

> 1. Run code similar to the following, modifying the filepath if necessary:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Run code similar to the following, modifying the `-FilePath` parameter if necessary:
```

```PowerShell
$Domain   = Read-Host "Enter the FQDN you plan to use to access the Chocolatey for Business Ansible Environment sites"
$Password = Read-Host "Enter a password to use for the PFX" -AsSecureString

$Cert = New-SelfSignedCertificate -DnsName $Domain -CertStoreLocation cert:\LocalMachine\My

> $Cert | Export-PfxCertificate -FilePath ~\Desktop\$($Domain).pfx -Password $Password

Reviewer: ```suggestion
$Cert | Export-PfxCertificate -FilePath $($Domain).pfx -Password $Password
```

Reviewer: Would it not be better just using the current directory rather than a folder off home?

```

You can then use this generated file and the password you set to deploy your Chocolatey for Business Ansible Environment.

> :choco-info: **NOTE**
>

> > Your browser will display warnings when accessing the Chocolatey for Business Ansible Environment sites with a self-signed certificate. To stop these warnings, you need to import this certificate to the `Trusted Root Certification Authorities` store on machines used to access the management sites. Unless you know what you're doing, we would strongly recommend using a certificate from a CA like LetsEncrypt.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Your browser will display warnings when accessing the Chocolatey for Business Ansible Environment sites with a self-signed certificate. To stop these warnings, you need to import this certificate to the `Trusted Root Certification Authorities` store on any computers used to access the services. Unless you know what you're doing, we would strongly recommend using a certificate from a CA like LetsEncrypt.
```

> #### Purchased/Acquired Certificates from CA

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Purchased/Acquired Certificates From a Certificate Authority
```

Organizations can also opt to purchase or acquire a certificate from an external Certificate Authority (e.g. [LetsEncrypt](https://github.com/win-acme/win-acme)).
As mentioned before, you will need to ensure that the "Subject/Common Name" attribute on the SSL certificates matches the FQDN you are using.
If you have a preferred vendor for certificates, you should refer to their documentation for best practices in acquiring a certificate.

## Common Errors and Resolutions

### SQL Installation Stalling

We have seen the SQL Server installation fail with code `-2068774911`, or hang indefinitely when the host only has IPv6 DNS.

> Though we have made strides in improving this situation, if you see a similar failure you may need to login to the machine with RDP and re-run the playbook. It should then succeed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This can be resolved by a login to the computer using RDP and re-running the playbook.
```

> ### Timeout when downloading Jenkins Plugins

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Timeout When Downloading Jenkins Plugins
```

> Due to the large amount of Jenkins plugins, we have seen this area fail the playbook due to timeouts depending on the reliability of the host connection. Rerunning the playbook after this failure should behave idempotently and run through the deployment correctly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sometimes the downloading of Jenkins plugins times out. Rerunning the playbook again should complete this.
```

For portions of this guide using Ansible, we will assume that you either have an Ansible Execution Environment preconfigured, or are using the [dev container](https://docs.github.com/en/codespaces/setting-up-your-project-for-codespaces/adding-a-dev-container-configuration/introduction-to-dev-containers) to execute the playbooks. You should have the latest supported version of the [Chocolatey.Chocolatey](https://galaxy.ansible.com/ui/repo/published/chocolatey/chocolatey/) Ansible collection installed, along with any additional prerequisites listed in the [requirements.txt](https://github.com/chocolatey/c4b-ansible/blob/main/requirements.txt).

You can install the Python requirements for the module using `PIP`, e.g.:

```sh
pip3 install --upgrade -r /requirements.txt
```

## Deploying the Chocolatey for Business Ansible Environment

The Chocolatey for Business Ansible Environment is designed to deploy Chocolatey Central Management and all the suggested softwares to one or more virtual machines within your environment, and provide methods for deploying Chocolatey for Business to your other endpoints.

> You can deploy this using Ansible Automation Platform, an existing installation of the Ansible client, or the dev container image provided within the repository (as well as a variety of other methods.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can deploy this using Ansible Automation Platform, an existing installation of the Ansible client, or the dev container image provided within the repository (as well as a variety of other methods).
```

If a connection string is passed, we assume the database is set up and do not install SQL Server.

For further details on defining Windows hosts in Ansible, see [this blog post](https://www.ansible.com/blog/connecting-to-a-windows-host) for some basics on Windows hosts and [this documentation](https://docs.ansible.com/ansible/latest/inventory_guide/intro_inventory.html) for further information on inventories.

#### Using An Existing Database

You can provide a connection string to the environment to use for storing Chocolatey Central Management data. This can have significant benefits for performance, as well as simplifying backups and load-balancing of instances.

To use an existing database server you wish to use, follow the instructions for [creating a database](xref:ccm-database) and provide the connection string when prompted by the playbook.

### Setting Secrets

Secrets, including credentials, for the various services will be generated during the deployment. They are stored temporarily in the `/credentials` directory within the repository, and you should store and remove them from this when the deployment is complete.

> If you would prefer to create and maintain them from scratch, you can modify the values of the following secrets within the [/group_vars/all.yml](https://github.com/chocolatey/c4b-ansible/blob/main/group_vars/all.yml) file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you would prefer to create and maintain them from scratch, you can modify the values of the following secrets within the [`/group_vars/all.yml`](https://github.com/chocolatey/c4b-ansible/blob/main/group_vars/all.yml) file:
```

## FAQ

### SSL Certificate

You will need an SSL certificate for the domain you intend to use. This certificate:

* Needs to be in the PFX format.
* Needs to include an exportable Private Key.
* Must have a password.

You can either provide a self-signed SSL certificate, or a purchased or acquired certificate from a Certificate Authority (CA).

#### Self-Signed SSL Certificates

You can quickly generate a self-signed certificate on any recent Windows computer, using PowerShell.

**PowerShell:**

1. Open an elevated PowerShell console
1. Run code similar to the following, modifying the `-FilePath` parameter of `Export-PfxCertificate` if necessary:

```PowerShell
$Domain   = Read-Host "Enter the FQDN you plan to use to access the Chocolatey for Business Ansible Environment sites"
$Password = Read-Host "Enter a password to use for the PFX" -AsSecureString

$Cert = New-SelfSignedCertificate -DnsName $Domain -CertStoreLocation cert:\LocalMachine\My
$Cert | Export-PfxCertificate -FilePath ~\Desktop\$($Domain).pfx -Password $Password
```

You can then use this generated file and the password you set to deploy your Chocolatey for Business Ansible Environment.

> :choco-info: **NOTE**
>

> > Your browser will display warnings when accessing the Chocolatey for Business Ansible Environment sites with a self-signed certificate. To stop these warnings, you need to import this certificate to the `Trusted Root Certification Authorities` store on any computers used to access the services. Unless you know what you're doing, we would strongly recommend using a certificate from a CA like LetsEncrypt.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Your browser will display warnings when accessing the Chocolatey for Business Ansible Environment sites with a self-signed certificate. To stop these warnings, you need to import this certificate to the `Trusted Root Certification Authorities` store on any computers used to access the services. Unless you know what you're doing, we would strongly recommend using a certificate from a CA like [LetsEncrypt](https://letsencrypt.org/).
```
